Title

Data from Kiteschsee Lake, Fildes Peninsula, South Shetland Islands, northern Antarctic Peninsula.

Abstract

The dataset comprises of data from Kiteschsee Lake, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands. 

Funding source

Data collected in this study were funded by: Centro de Investigaciones en Ciencias de la Tierra (CICTERRA), the Dirección Nacional del Antártico/Instituto Antártico Argentino (DNA/IAA) in the framework of the Project PICTA, 2011 – 0102, IAA “Geomorfología y Geología Glaciar del Archipiélago James Ross e Islas Shetland del Sur, Sector Norte de la Península Antártica”; the Alfred Wegener Institute (AWI) research program Polar regions and Coasts in a changing Earth System (PACES II); IMCONet (FP7 IRSES, action no. 318718); the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC/BAS-CGS Grant no.81); the NERC/BAS science programmes CACHE-PEP: Natural climate variability – extending the Americas palaeoclimate transect through the Antarctic Peninsula to the pole and GRADES-QWAD: Quaternary West Antarctic Deglaciations. We thank the crews of the Argentine research station “Carlini'' and the adjoined German Dallmann-Labor (AWI) Laboratory, the Uruguayan research station “Artigas”, the Russian Bellingshausen Station, the Chinese Great Wall Station, Base Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalva, the Brazilian Navy Almirante Maximiano, the UK Navy HMS Endurance and NERC/BAS James Clark Ross for logistical support during the 2006, 2011, 2014 and 2015 field seasons. 

Keywords

Deglaciation; geomorphological mapping; radiocarbon dating; South Shetland Islands; stratigraphy; glacial readvance

Personnel

Data collectors & analysts (ORCID code)

Stephen J. Roberts1 (0000-0001-5542-3703) – all data collection and analysis and data collator
Emma J. Pearson2 – lake sediment core data collection and analysis
Joanna Davies3 – diatom analysis
Vivienne J. Jones3 – diatom analysis
Imogen Gabriel4 – tephra counting and geochemistry
Simon Blockley4 – tephra counting and geochemistry
Sarah J. Davies5 – XRF core scanning analysis
Thomas P. Roland6 – Pb-210 dating analysis


Affiliations

1British Antarctic Survey, Natural Environment Research Council, High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge, CB3 0ET, UK.
2School of Geography, Politics and Sociology, Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE1 7RU, UK.
3ECRC Dept. of Geography, University College London, North West Wing, Gower St, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
4Dept. of Geography, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham, Surrey, TW20 OEX, UK.
5Aberystwyth University, Department of Geography and Earth Sciences, Aberystwyth, SY23 3DB, UK.
11Department of Geography, University of Exeter, Exeter EX4 4RJ, UK.

Lineage/methodology

Kiteschsee Lake data

We undertook multi-proxy analyses (diatom, grain size, geochemical and sedimentological analysis) on a 77 cm-long sediment record extracted from the flat-bottomed eastern basin depocentre of Kiteschsee Lake and compared data obtained with published lake records from the Fildes Peninsula. A chronology for the Kiteschsee Lake sediment record was based on two aquatic moss ages, six bulk sediment AMS radiocarbon ages, and four tephra correlation ages and established using Bayesian age-depth modelling in BACON v. 2.5 in R (Blaauw and Christen, 2011).

Instrumentation

High resolution X-ray fluorescence (ITRAX) core scanning (XRF-CS) of bulk sediment was performed at contiguous 0.02 cm (200 µm) intervals following standard procedures on the ITRAX-XRF machine at Aberystwyth University.

Quality

To account for downcore variations in count rate, density, water and organic content, XRF-CS data are presented as relative changes in percentages of the Total Scatter Normalised ratio sum (%TSN), which is equivalent to the %cps sum and as natural log ratios and centred log ratios (clr). Log ratios have been shown to produce similar downcore patterns to more traditional, and fully quantitative, Wavelength Dispersive Spectroscopy, WDS-XRF, dry subsample analysis. Data were filtered to remove the small number of downcore spectra with kcps less than mean minus two-SD, caused mainly by small gaps in the core, and MSE values greater than mean plus four-SD as this represents a poor fit of the measured to theoretical energy spectra.

Related datasets

Chronostratigraphic data from the Fildes Peninsula, South Shetland Islands.

Compilation data from the Fildes Peninsula, South Shetland Islands.

Chronological and sedimentological data from stratigraphic sections on Potter Peninsula, South Shetland Islands.

Chronological, geochemical and sedimentological data from a lake sediment record extracted from Lake L5 (Matias Lake) on Potter Peninsula, South Shetland Islands.

Chronological, geochemical and sedimentological data from a lake sediment record extracted from Lake L15 (GPS Lake) on Potter Peninsula, South Shetland Islands.

Related URLs

Code is available on: www.github.com/stever60/Fildes_Peninsula 

Temporal coverage

Cores were extracted and data collected between November 2011 and 2015; data covers the last 8000  years

Spatial coverage

Fildes Peninsula, South Shetland Islands

Resolution

N/A

Location

Fildes Peninsula, South Shetland Islands
Kiteschsee Lake is located at 62° 11’36.55’’S, 58° 57’59.93’’W 

References

Blaauw M and Christen JA. (2011) Flexible paleoclimate age-depth models using an autoregressive gamma process. Bayesian Analysis 6: 457-474.

Heredia Barión P, Roberts SJ, Spiegel C, Binnie SA, Wacker L, Davies J, et al. (in review) Holocene deglaciation and glacier readvances on the Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, NW Antarctic Peninsula. The Holocene. https://doi.org/10.31223/X59S7S 

Heredia Barión P, Strelin JA, Roberts SJ, Spiegel C, Wacker L, Niedermann S, et al. (in press). Holocene deglaciation, glacial dynamics and the geomorphology of Potter Peninsula, King George Island (Isla 25 de Mayo), NW Antarctic Peninsula. Frontiers in Earth Science. https://doi.org/10.31223/X5606J 


Data structure and data format

Age_depth_model folder –input and output txt and csv files for age-depth modelling runs from the Kiteschsee Lake record

Kite_ITRAX – folder containing ITRAX XRF core scanning datafiles

KITE_ITRAX_200um_cps_TSN.csv – summary cps (count per second) and Total Scatter Normalised data, equivalent to percentage of cps (count per second) sum data for ITRAX X-ray fluorescence core scanning (XRF-CS) analysis

KITE_ITRAX_200um_TSN_qc.csv – percentage Total Scatter Normalised data, equivalent to percentage of cps (count per second) sum summary data for ITRAX X-ray fluorescence core scanning (XRF-CS) analysis (quality controlled – qc – filtered)

Kite1.1_basal folder – folder containing document settings txt file, summary output txt files, summary average spectra txt file, and optical and X-ray image tifs and a folder with all raw XRF spectra txt files for the Kite 1.1 core section

Kite2.1_top folder – folder containing document settings txt file, summary output txt files, summary average spectra txt file, and optical and X-ray image tifs and a folder with all raw XRF spectra txt files for the Kite 2.1 core section

Kite_C14_data.csv – radiocarbon ages from the Kiteschsee Lake record

KITE_Diatoms_pc.csv – percentage count diatom data 

KITE_Diatom_CONISS_PCA_sqrt.cvs – diatom data used in PCA analysis

KITE_DMAR_MSCL_Density.csv_subsample density and GEOTEK MSCL (multi-sensor core logger) density data compared

KITE_GEOTEK_MSCL_0.5cm.csv – GEOTEK MSCL data

KITE_LOI_GrainSize.csv – grain size and loss-on-ignition data for the Kiteschsee Lake record

KITE_Tephra_Count_data.csv – tephra shard count data for the Kiteschsee Lake record

EPMA_db.csv – new compilation of major element tephra shard geochemistry from South America  and the Antarctic used for data analysis and comparison tephra data from to the Kiteschsee Lake record

Access constraints

None after publication but a log in for reviewers to access an embargoed dataset is needed.

Use constraints

NERC-funded data, so the Open Government Licence applies.


